all the atoms in the universe heavier
than hydrogen and helium are forged by
stars Fars are really interesting they
they don't just sit there they know that
because they last so much longer than we
do we think they're their permanent
stars are the ultimate alchemists they
turn light elements into heavier ones
they get the energy that they need to
glow that way star begins its life made
out of hydrogen and helium mostly about
seventy percent hydrogen twenty-eight
percent helium in the case of the Sun in
a star's core the temperature and
pressure are so high that hydrogen atoms
fuse together to make helium hydrogen
fusion releases prodigious amounts of
energy light of a star that's the story
for ninety percent of the life of a star
fusing hydrogen to make helium
eventually though the star runs out of
hydrogen and begins to fuse it stocks of
helium making yet heavier elements and
so the way it works and it always works
this way is that it contracts and it
gets hotter and if it can find something
new to burn whether it's the kitchen
sink or coal or whatever it will burn it
helium is taken three at a time to make
carbon you can add one more helium to
that carbon and make element number
eight oxygen that's a tremendous step
forward you get carbon and nitrogen and
oxygen made in stars now this is great
because on the board we already have the
principal elements of life organic
chemistry is the chemistry of carbon
carbon fuses next and still heavier
elements begin to
form sulfur argon chlorine potassium
calcium scandium the pace of this gets
faster and faster back in the middle
silicon is starting to burn at three and
a half billion degrees stupendous
temperature it makes the day neum
vanadium chromium manganese cobalt
nickel and iron iron is really the end
of the road it's it's sort of the
nuclear turnip out of which you just
cannot squeeze any more it's the end of
the game a star that has relied on
fusion has come to the point where it
has nothing more to spend the star is
suddenly caught in a disaster there's
radiation going out from the outside but
deep in the inside there's no more fuel
iron can't fuel the stellar furnace and
so when a star builds up too much iron
it dies liqueur collapses it bounces and
it begins to move out first slowly and
then faster and faster and that sends a
very sharp wave back out through the
start and now what was falling down is
going out the whole things blowing up
and you made supernova the supernova
explosion it can be as bright as four
billion stars like the Sun to stupendous
explosion
such outrageous energies overcome the
iron barrier cooking atoms into all the
rest of the elements on the periodic
table so starting down here you can go
copper the gala Jermaine personal so
Cody and you believed in them to see
funny rotation turbodiesel or iodine
xenon Francis Marion left a moratorium
until you see Gloria precision air india
but that's enough elements